welcome to topcast and to episode
106 which is part two of chapter four of
the fabric of reality criteria for
reality and in the last part we went
through a refutation of solipsism and
the various other what one might call
metaphysical theories about ultimate
reality namely that realism might not be
true because perhaps it's all a dream
going on in your head or perhaps it's a
simulation going on in a computer or
perhaps it's the machinations of an evil
demon whatever the case might be
realism might not be false how can we
rule this out and we were talking about
the fact that no scientific experiment
can falsify
that kind of theory that kind of strange
claim that reality itself might be
utterly different from what we
experience or what our science is
telling us the truth of the matter
happens to be and that all of our
supposed good explanations are actually
bad explanations based upon the fact
that ultimate reality is all going on in
the mind of a dreamer it seems we can't
rule that out logically and we can't
rule that out scientifically either
so what can we do well what we can do is
what we did do in the last episode and
in the fabric of reality david goes
through a refutation not a scientific
falsification not a logical disproof but
a philosophical refutation an
explanation that these explanations are
bad explanations and where we finished
was with david saying in the fabric of
reality and i'll quote again quote so we
can continue reassured with common sense
realism and the pursuit of explanations
by scientific methods but in the light
of this conclusion what can we say about
the arguments that made solipsism and
its relatives superficially plausible
namely that they could neither be proved
false nor ruled out by experiment what
is the status of those arguments now if
we have neither proved solipsism false
nor ruled it out by experiment what have
we done and david goes on to say there
is an assumption built into this
question it is that theories can be
classified in a hierarchy
mathematical to scientific to
philosophical of decreasing intrinsic
reliability
many people take the existence of this
hierarchy for granted despite the fact
that these judgments of comparative
reliability depend entirely on
philosophical arguments arguments that
classify themselves as quite unreliable
in fact the idea of this hierarchy as a
cousin of the reductionist mistake i
discussed in chapter one namely the
theory that microscopic laws and
phenomena are more fundamental than
emergent ones pausing there my
reflection we learn this in school and
in fact mathematics teachers are quite
proud of the fact they can say to the
other teachers of other subjects we have
privileged access to teaching certainty
to teaching mathematical logical
certainty in our classes and they really
take this seriously i suppose they get
it from their lecturers as well so it
bleeds into culture because it's kind of
there in the schooling system that
mathematics is taught as being
absolutely certain on a firm foundation
but of course this very claim that
mathematics is certain that it is built
upon a firm foundation an infallible way
of getting at the truth that very claim
is itself a philosophical argument it's
false it turns out that it's false but
the mere fact that we're trying to that
anyone would be trying to make that
argument should reconsider the fact that
they're not getting there by a
mathematical proof which is supposedly
the only way to get to absolutely
certain truth so if the argument for
mathematics has the only privileged
access to absolutely certain truth but
that argument itself is based upon a
philosophical claim which itself
supposedly is nothing but a mere matter
of opinion we've got a problem and of
course in the david deutsch fallibilist
worldview we're going to do away with
all of that and we're simply going to
regard each of the different domains of
our inquiry call them what you want
mathematical scientific philosophical as
all unequal footing in a sense all part
of an interconnected web of knowledge an
interconnected web of fallible guesses
about the nature of reality so let's go
on to see what david says next about
this quote
the same assumption occurs in
inductivism which supposes that we can
be absolutely certain of the conclusions
of mathematical arguments because they
are deductive reasonably sure of
scientific arguments because they are
inductive and forever undecided about
philosophical arguments which it sees as
little more than matters of taste end
quote and isn't that the truth i mean
not only do we pick that up in school
it's something that i think almost
everyone lives with all the time unless
they've encountered the work of popper
and deutsch and associated ideas but you
don't have to step very far outside of
the popularian worldview or the
worldview presented in the fabric of
reality at the beginning of infinity
before you get this as simply common
sense this idea that as david says there
in that paragraph mathematical arguments
are certain because they're deductive
you so you can be sure of them and you
can be almost sure of scientific
arguments because they're inductive and
as for philosophy well that's just a
mere matter of opinion more or less so
i'm skipping about a paragraph and david
goes on to say quote the rejection of
mere explanations on the grounds that
they are not justified by any ultimate
explanation inevitably propels one into
futile searches for an ultimate source
of justification there is no such source
nor is there that hierarchy of
reliability from mathematical to
scientific to philosophical arguments
some philosophical arguments including
the argument against solipsism are far
more compelling than any scientific
argument indeed every scientific
argument assumes the falsity not only of
solipsism but also of other
philosophical theories including any
number of variants of solipsism that
might contradict specific parts of the
scientific argument i shall also show in
chapter 10 that even purely mathematical
arguments derive their reliability from
the physical and philosophical theories
that underpin them and therefore they
cannot after all yield absolute
certainty having embraced realism we are
continually faced with decisions as to
whether entities referred to in
competing explanations are real or not
deciding that they are not real as we
did in the case of the angel theory of
planetary emotion is equivalent to
rejecting the corresponding explanation
thus in searching for and judging
explanations we need more than just a
refutation of solipsism we need to
develop reasons for accepting or
rejecting the existence of entities that
may appear in contending theories in
other words we need a criterion for
reality we should not of course expect
to find a final or infallible criterion
our judgments of what is or is not real
always depend on the various
explanations that are available to us
and sometimes change as our explanations
improve just pausing in my reflection so
what david is going to come to here in
the fabric of reality is that our
criterion for reality is whether or not
an entity kicks back and we'll have more
to say about this this is dr johnson's
criterion
and whether something kicks back is
about whether it behaves autonomously
unpredictably in a complex way in a way
that would require if it was going to be
an illusion computationally highly
complex in order to simulate in order to
give us the appearance of that thing but
later of course in the beginning of
infinity i think we get a more
parsimonious version of this which
entails all of those other ways in which
we explain whether a thing is real or
not whether a thing exists or not where
we say a thing is real or a thing exists
to the extent that it appears in our
best explanations of reality if and only
if it appears in those explanations so
i'll pick it up where david says quote
not only do explanations change but our
criteria and ideas about what should
count as an explanation are gradually
changing improving too so the list of
acceptable modes of explanation will
always be open-ended and consequently
the list of acceptable criteria for
reality must be open-ended too
but what is it about an explanation
given that for whatever reasons we find
it satisfactory that should make us
classify some things as real and other
things as illusory or imaginary james
boswell relates in his life of johnson
how he and dr johnson were discussing
bishop berkeley's solipsistic theory of
the non-existence of the material world
boswell remarked that although no one
believed the theory no one could refuse
it either dr johnson kicked a hard rock
and said as his foot rebounded i refute
it thus dr johnson's point was that
berkeley's denial of the rock's
existence is incompatible with finding
an explanation of the rebound that he
himself felt solipsism cannot
accommodate any explanation of why that
experiment or any experiment should have
one outcome rather than another to
explain the effect that the rock had on
him dr johnson was forced to take a
position on the nature of rocks were
they part of an autonomous external
reality or were they figments of his
imagination in the latter case he would
have to conclude that his imagination
was itself a vast complex autonomous
universe pausing near my reflection so
bishop berkeley or bishop barkley
however we pronounce it he had this
vision of idealism idealism meaning that
what is apparently happening in external
reality isn't really it's just all ideas
that's going on inside your head but
what johnson would say about that what
dr johnson would say about that is if
you kick a rock and reliably the same
experience is happening again and again
you're effectively doing a scientific
experiment in order to test theories
about what happens when you kick rocks
and your foot continues to rebound why
should it have this consistent character
why should there be this autonomous way
in which your imagination behaves
consistently over time you would have to
concede that your imagination
is itself this extremely complex thing
which behaves according to physical laws
that one can discover and as we say that
means that your idealism bishop
berkeley's idealism this idea of
solipsism or whatever you like
is nothing but realism the claim that
there really is an external autonomous
reality which you cannot simply imagine
into existence you cannot imagine into
existence the behavior of different
things but rather you have to go out
into the world and investigate things
and to find out how they're going to
behave namely by kicking them if it was
all just in your imagination we should
expect that each time you kick the rock
something different might happen
sometimes your foot might rebound
sometimes it might go through it
sometimes the rock might disappear
sometimes the rock might turn into a
rabbit and so on and add infinitum but
the fact that the rock behaves in a
predictable way and the fact that we can
learn about the properties of rocks and
so on and so forth for every other
object in our external reality
means that it can't just all be in your
imagination or if you postulate that all
you're saying is that your imagination
is equally as complex and subject to
physical laws as real physical realities
and so you are just saying that realism
is true plus the assumption that you're
dreaming that physical reality into
existence so it's a needless
philosophical assumption david goes on
to say after a paragraph that i'm
skipping quote but dr johnson's idea is
more than just a refutation of solipsism
it also illustrates the criterion for
reality that is used in science namely
if something can kick back it exists
kicking back here does not necessarily
mean that the alleged object is
responding to being kicked to being
physically affected as dr johnson's rock
was it is enough that when we kick
something the object affects us in ways
that require
independent explanation for example
galileo had no means of affecting
planets but he could affect the light
that came from them his equivalent of
kicking the rock was refracting that
light from the lenses of his telescopes
and eyes that light responded by kicking
his retina back the way it kicked back
allowed him to conclude not only that
the light was real but that the
heliocentric planetary motions required
to explain the patterns in which the
light arrived were also real by the way
dr johnson did not directly kick the
rock either a person is a mind not a
body the dr johnson who performed the
experiment was a mind and that mind
directly kicked only some nerves which
transmitted signals to the muscles which
propelled his foot towards the rock
shortly afterwards dr johnson perceived
being kicked back by the rock but again
only indirectly after the impact had set
up a pressure pattern in his shoe and
then in his skin and had then led to
electrical impulses in his nerves and so
forth dr johnson's mind like galileo's
and everyone else's kicked nerves and
was kicked back by nerves and inferred
the existence and properties of reality
from those interactions alone what dr
johnson was entitled to infer about
reality depends on how he could best
explain what had happened just pausing
there my reflection so
this concept of kicking back obviously
it's metaphorical in almost all
situations except when you're explicitly
kicking rocks but even then as david
says it's not really you that are
kicking the rock you are kicking the
nerves inside of your brain all that
aside what the kickback means is that
you are getting evidence feedback from
the external physical reality around you
and that external physical reality is
not merely bending to your will it is
sometimes behaving in completely
unpredictable ways as
galileo's discovery through his
telescope was i'm not sure if he
hypothesized that there would be
definitely moon's going around jupiter
but when he saw that that was an
unexpected kickback from reality galileo
by the way was the first one to discover
moon's orbiting jupiter okay so skipping
a quite substantial part of the book now
a couple of pages and i'm picking it up
where david says quote it is not how
hard something kicks back that makes the
theory of its existence compelling what
matters is its role in the explanations
that such a theory provides i have given
examples from physics where very tiny
kicks lead us to momentous conclusions
about reality because we have no other
explanation the converse can also happen
if there is no clear-cut winner among
the contending explanations then even a
very powerful kick may not convince us
that the supposed source has independent
reality for example you may one day see
terrifying monsters attacking you and
then wake up if the explanation that
they originated within your own mind
seems adequate it would be irrational
for you to conclude that there really
are such monsters out there if you feel
a sudden pain in your shoulder as you
walk down a busy street and look around
and see nothing to explain it you may
wonder whether the pain was caused by an
unconscious part of your own mind or by
your body or by something outside you
may consider it possible that a hidden
prankster has shot you with an airgun
yet come to no conclusion as to the
reality of such a person but if you then
saw an airgun pellet rolling away on the
pavement you might conclude that no
explanation solved the problem as well
as the airgun explanation in which case
you would adopt it in other words you
would tentatively infer the existence of
a person you had not seen and might
never see just because of that person's
role in the best explanation available
to you pausing there my reflection now
isn't that a wonderful little example as
i have often said on this podcast
getting it straight from david deutsch
we are usually in science explaining the
scene in terms of the unseen this is
what science is all about almost every
single interesting phenomena in modern
science is about explaining what we do
see light rocks stars
etc etc matter around us all the stuff
we see is explained in terms of things
we cannot see subatomic particles
nuclear processes going on inside of
stars the core of the earth evolution on
time scales that we cannot observe the
movement of tectonic plates etc etc and
this is not unusual even in day-to-day
life as david says there you know you
might very well have this experience of
being shot by an airgun well if that
happens and you see the pellet rolling
away it would be the best explanation
that someone that you might never see
the unseen person must exist in order
for you to have experienced what you
experienced as david goes on to say
quote clearly the theory of such a
person's existence is not a logical
consequence of the observed evidence
which incidentally would consist of a
single observation nor does that theory
have the form of an inductive
generalization for example that you will
observe the same thing again if you
perform the same experiment nor is the
theory experimentally testable
experiment could never prove the absence
of a hidden prankster despite all that
the argument in favor of the theory
could be overwhelmingly convincing if it
were the best explanation pausing there
my reflection so this is what detectives
and the legal system have to do all the
time
what they're doing is
trying to explain one-off events rather
often and when you have these one-off
events a particular murder a particular
assault where you do not have the
murderer or you do not have the criminal
in custody and you might not even know
who the person is yet
nonetheless the best explanation has to
be that a person did it that a
particular person did this thing but you
can't arrive at that conclusion
based upon any kind of inductive claim
it's not like you're going to be able to
witness that same murder over and over
again you've got it only one time you're
witnessing it only once and you will
only ever witness it once and there's no
experiment that you can do in order to
demonstrate that a person a particular
person did this murder but rather what
we do is we gather evidence and then the
best explanation of the evidence our
conjectures which all come to bear on
trying to explain this evidence are then
set against one another in light of the
evidence and each of them ruled out
until one of them ideally explains all
the evidence and no piece of evidence is
able to rule out a particular murderer
or criminal or whatever happens to be
the case so i guess what i'm saying
there is if you want another refutation
of inductivism then just look at how the
legal system works david goes on to say
quote whenever i have used dr johnson's
criterion to argue for the reality of
something one attribute in particular
has always been relevant namely
complexity we prefer simpler
explanations to more complex ones and we
prefer explanations that are capable of
accounting for detail and complexity to
explanations that can account only for
simple aspects of phenomena dr johnson's
criterion tells us to regard as real
those complex entities which if we did
not regard them as real would complicate
our explanations for instance we must
regard the planets as real because if we
did not we should be forced into
complicated explanations of a cosmic
planetarium or have altered laws of
physics or of angels or of whatever else
would under that assumption be giving us
the illusion that there are planets out
there in space thus the observed
complexity in the structural behavior of
an entity is part of the evidence that
that entity is real but it is not
sufficient evidence we do not for
example deem our reflections in a mirror
to be real people of course illusions
themselves are real physical processes
but the illusory entities they show us
need not be considered real because they
derive their complexity from somewhere
else they are not autonomously complex
why do we accept the mirror theory of
reflections but reject the planetarium
theory of the solar system it is because
given a simple explanation of the action
of mirrors we can understand that
nothing of what we see in them genuinely
lies behind them no further explanation
is needed because the reflections though
complex are not autonomous their
complexity is merely borrowed from our
side of the mirror that is not so for
planets the theory that the cosmic
planetarium is real and that nothing
lies beyond it only makes the problem
worse for if we accepted it then instead
of asking only how the solar system
works we should first have to ask how
the planetarium works and then how the
solar system it is displaying works we
could not avoid the latter question and
it is effectively a repetition of what
we were trying to answer in the first
place
now we can rephrase dr johnson's
criterion thus if
according to the simplest explanation an
entity is complex and autonomous then
that entity is real computational
complexity theory is the branch of
computer science that is concerned with
what resources such as time memory
capacity or energy are required to
perform given classes of computations
the complexity of a piece of information
is defined in terms of the computational
resources such as the length of the
program the number of computational
steps or the amount of memory that a
computer would need if it was to
reproduce that piece of information
several different definitions of
complexity are in use each with its own
domain of applicability the exact
definitions need not concern us here but
they are all based on the idea that a
complex process is one that in effect
presents us with the results of a
substantial computation the sense in
which the motion of planets presents us
with the results of a substantial
computation is well illustrated by a
planetarium consider a planetarium
controlled by a computer which
calculates the exact image that the
projectors should display to represent
the night sky to do this authentically
the computer has to use the formulae
provided by astronomical theories in
fact the computation is identical to the
one that it would perform if it were
calculating predictions of where an
observatory should point its telescopes
to see real planets and stars what we
mean by saying that the appearance of
the planetarium is as complex as that of
the night sky depicts is that those two
computations one describing the night
sky the other describing the planetarium
are largely identical so we can
re-express dr johnson's criterion again
in terms of hypothetical computations
quote if a substantial amount of
computation would be required to give us
the illusion that a certain entity is
real then that entity is real if dr
johnson's leg invariably rebounded when
he extended it then the source of his
illusions god a virtual reality machine
or whatever would need to perform only a
single computation to determine when to
give him the rebounding sensation
something like if leg is extended then
rebound but to reproduce what dr johnson
experienced in a realistic experiment it
would be necessary to take into account
where the rock is and whether dr
johnson's foot is going to hit or miss
it and how heavy how hard and how firmly
lodged it is and whether anyone else has
just kicked it out of the way and so on
a vast computation pausing there my
reflection so yes this is the point
if you're trying to assert
that what external reality appears to be
isn't actually real but rather it's an
illusion it's a dream it's a deception
by a demon or a god or something like
that then what you're saying is that
those objects in the illusion the dream
rocks the dream people the dream planets
and so on and so forth are acting in
such a way that is so complex that if
you were to get a computer to actually
compute what is required in order to
make the illusion as real as realism
would otherwise seem
means that you have to compute precisely
the laws of physics as they are under
realism basically if you're trying to
create the illusion of a rock you need
to simulate a rock and the higher the
fatality of the simulation of that rock
the more computation is required and
clearly if you've got a an illusion that
has the fidelity of realism then you're
going to have to do a simulation that is
of such high resolution that you may as
well just that you may as well just fall
back on realism realism is just all of
that simulation without the needless
extra assumption that it's all a
simulation but we might very well
consider where is this really an issue
apart from in the hallowed halls of
academia in the ivory tower debating
about whether or not we're all living in
a simulation or it's all a dream does
this really have any practical
significance is it really a scientific
question well yes of course it is this
is one of the motivations for the fabric
of reality is in trying to persuade
people that there is a realistic way of
looking at quantum theory so yes because
this has many antecedents okay the
classic one is of course galileo galileo
trying to convince the church that it
wasn't just that we appeared to live in
a universe where the sun was at the
center and the earth was orbiting the
sun but rather those appearances were
reality the explanation of the sun being
at the center and the earth going around
the sun and the other planets going
around the sun wasn't merely a
convenient mathematical device for
making predictions it was reality and so
we come forward to today where people
deny the realistic conception of quantum
theory they deny the richness of what
reality contains but we need that
richness that complexity that
computational complexity in order to be
able to make the accurate predictions
that we do make nowhere is this more
clear than in the case of quantum theory
as david goes on to say in this very
chapter quote physicists trying to cling
to a single universe worldview sometimes
try to explain quantum interference
phenomena as follows no shadow photons
exist they say or in other words no
multiverse exists and what carries the
effect of the distance slits to the
photon we see is nothing some sort of
action at a distance as in newton's law
of gravity simply makes photons change
course when a distance that is opened
but there is nothing simple about this
supposed action at a distance the
appropriate physical law would have to
say that a photon is affected by distant
objects exactly as if
something were passing through the
distant gaps and bouncing off the
distant mirrors so as to intercept that
photon at the right time and place
calculating how a photon reacts to these
different objects would require the same
computational effort as working out the
history of large numbers of shadow
photons the computation would have to
work its way through a story of what
each shadow photon does it bounces off
this is stopped by that and so on
therefore just as with dr johnson's rock
and just as with galileo's planets a
story that is in effect about shadow
photons necessarily appears in any
explanation of the observed effects the
irreducible complexity of that story
makes it philosophically untenable to
deny that the object exists end quote
this is just my reflection here another
way of putting this is that well when
you look at the shredding a wave
equation which is a description of the
position for example it doesn't have to
be the position it could be
any of the other quantum properties that
a particle or a system happens to have
it could be the velocities of these
particles but let's say in a simple case
we're just talking about i don't know
the the position of a single electron
then what you have at some time t
is a plot of all the positions that in
theory actually in reality but in theory
the electron is occupying and you need
to have all of these positions in order
to be able to make some claim about
how this electron is going to behave in
the future so what positions it will it
could possibly occupy in the future at
some future time t and so if you're
going to make that prediction by
calculating using the laws of quantum
theory you have to know what all the
positions are now and if all those
positions come together now in order to
affect future positions and future
velocities of
the electron then in what sense aren't
they real well some people just deny
that these are all real and in fact that
all the possible positions that the
electron could have at some point in the
future well they all collapse as we say
the the collapse of the wave function
happens upon measurement and this is to
deny the reality of all those other
positions and yet those other positions
were required in order to make sensible
claims about
where the electron is now and where the
electron might be found in the future so
this is the sense in which it is as
computationally complex to either have a
single universe theory or a many
universes theory the single universe's
theory simply says that all the entities
required to
take account of when you're computing
what is going to happen from one moment
to the next using the laws of quantum
theory all those entities are not real
the only ones that are real are the ones
that you observe so there's some special
place for the observer there's some
special physics for the observer and
this is what the multiverse vision of
quantum theory denies it says there is
no special dispensation there is no
special theory of physics for observers
there is one universal physics for
everything observers and non-observers
and hence it's all real all the things
required in the computation everything
that makes these situations
computationally complex are real but
still some people deny the reality of
the things that we cannot see which as
we've said in this podcast as david says
in both of his books over and over again
is a strange way of envisioning
envisioning what science is science is
the scene in terms of the unseen as
david goes on to say right now quote the
physicist david bohm constructed a
theory with predictions identical to
those of quantum theory in which a sort
of wave accompanies every photon washes
over the entire barrier passes through
the slits and interferes with the photon
that we see bohm's theory is often
presented as a single universe variant
of quantum theory but according to dr
johnson's criterion that is a mistake
working out what berm's invisible wave
will do requires the same computations
as working out what trillions of shadow
photons will do some parts of the wave
describe us the observers detecting and
reacting to photons other parts of the
wave describe other versions of us
reacting to photons in different
positions berm's modest nomenclature
referring to most of reality as a wave
does not change the fact that in his
theory reality consists of large sets of
complex entities each of which can
perceive other entities in its own set
but can only indirectly perceive
entities in other sets these sets of
entities are in other words parallel
universes pausing their my reflection
yes so bohmian wave mechanics this idea
of david bone that there is this
indivisible wave that passes through the
slits for example that that is
accompanying any particle that we see
has an accompanying wave associated with
it well this wave is
just the counterparts in the other
universes of the particle that we see
and as david has said in other contexts
this is nothing but the multiverse in
heavy disguise not even that heavy
disguise really after all if you were to
have a god's eye view of the multiverse
and if you were to see
uh what happens during a interference
experiment such as
firing a supposed one electron at a
double slit then what you would see is
something that looks like a wave but
that's just because the stupendously
large amount of accompanying electrons
in other universes there's so many of
them that they appear to move all when
you take them all together the entire
ensemble of them the entire set of them
or class of them or however you want to
describe them appears to move kind of
like a wave it would kind of look like a
wave in higher dimensional space it is a
wave and if you were to just glance at
that wave you might very well say well
that's a wave but then if you ask the
question what is that wave made out of
and you look closely at high resolution
you would see that the wave that appears
to be there is actually made up of lots
and lots of particles it's made up of
lots and lots of electrons that are
accompanying the electron that any
observer in any particular universe
would observe as only being one electron
let's continue and david says quote i
have described galileo's new conception
of our relationship with external
reality as a great methodological
discovery it gave us a new reliable form
of reasoning involving observational
evidence that is indeed one aspect of
his discovery scientific reasoning is
reliable not in the sense that it
certifies that any particular theory
will survive unchanged even until
tomorrow but in the sense that we are
right to rely on it for we are right to
seek solutions to problems rather than
sources of ultimate justification
observational evidence is indeed
evidence not in the sense that any
theory can be deduced induced or in any
other way inferred from it but in the
sense that it can constitute a genuine
reason for preferring one theory to
another pausing there just my reflection
on that so how can observational
evidence cause us to prefer one theory
over another well simply by the fact
that observational evidence tends to
refute all other theories except for one
ideally this is what happens in science
we end up only with one theory being
able to explain the observational
evidence so all of its rivals are no
longer preferred and this is what this
is the sense in which we say that it
allows us to prefer one theory to
another or one theory to all the other
rivals the observational evidence simply
rules out all the other rivals can only
be explained by
one theory one explanation that we have
to fall back on the most classic of all
the examples that i use eddington's
experiment where starlight appears to be
in one place rather than another that
one place at the starlight does appear
during a solar eclipse is predicted by
general relativity but none of the other
rivals no other rival to general
relativity can make that prediction in
the way that general relativity does and
so therefore we prefer general
relativity over those other theories
let's continue david says quote but
there is another side to galileo's
discovery which is much less often
appreciated the reliability of
scientific reasoning is not just an
attribute of us of our knowledge and our
relationship with reality it is also a
new fact about physical reality itself a
fact which galileo expressed in the
phrase the book of nature is written in
mathematical symbols as i have said it
is impossible literally to read any
shred of a theory in nature that is the
inductivist mistake but what is
genuinely out there is evidence or more
precisely a reality that will respond
with evidence if we interact
appropriately with it given a shred of a
theory or rather shreds of several rival
theories the evidence is available out
there to enable us to distinguish
between them anyone can search for it
find it and improve upon it if they take
the trouble they do not need
authorization or initiation or holy
texts they need only be looking in the
right way with fertile problems and
promising theories in mind
this open accessibility not only of
evidence but of the whole mechanism of
knowledge acquisition is a key attribute
of galileo's conception of reality
galileo may have thought this
self-evident but it is not it is a
substantive assertion about what
physical reality is like logically
reality need not have had this
science-friendly property but it does
and in abundance galileo's universe is
saturated with evidence copernicus had
assembled evidence for his heliocentric
theory in poland tycho brahe had
collected his evidence in denmark and
kepler in germany and by pointing his
telescope at the skies over italy
galileo gained greater access to the
same evidence every part of the earth's
surface on every clear night for
billions of years has been deluged with
evidence about the facts and laws of
astronomy for many other sciences
evidence has similarly been on display
to be viewed more clearly in modern
times by microscopes and other
instruments where evidence is not
already physically present we can bring
it into existence with devices such as
lasers and pierced barriers devices
which it is open to anyone anywhere at
any time to build
and the evidence will be the same
regardless of who reveals it the more
fundamental a theory is the more readily
available is the evidence that bears
upon it to those who know how to look
not just on earth but throughout the
multiverse pausing there my reflection
on this isn't this a wonderfully
positive optimistic way of envisioning
how to do science it's open to anyone
anywhere to make these profound
discoveries as david deutsch says
elsewhere the evidence in order to win a
nobel prize is here right now in this
room either falling from the sky in form
in the form of light or around you in
the atoms out of which the matter is
made
for you to make the discovery that will
lead to the next greatest breakthrough
that could lead to the nobel prize what
he says there is where evidence is not
already physically present we can bring
it into existence with devices such as
lasers and pierced barriers devices
which it is open to anyone
anywhere at any time to build now yes
building large hadron colliders and
james webb space telescopes yes that's
hard that's expensive but in principle
in principle it's possible and as wealth
increases for everyone this means it
becomes more and more possible over time
for people to have more and more
sophisticated equipment to make the
scientific breakthroughs that are
required to solve the problems of the
future everyone now just about carries
around an extremely high fidelity camera
and a supercomputer in their pocket
which can do the kind of experimental
work that people before could only dream
of the fact that so few people use them
in order to actually do science well
that's another issue the fact is science
is an even playing field it's as even as
you like and the cheap and readily
available super technology that we have
now in the form of smartphones and
computers and that kind of thing means
that even if there is a wealth
inequality between people that wealth
inequality is actually decreasing over
time people talk about the increase in
inequality but that is usually only ever
based on you know number of shares in a
company held by someone like elon musk
who you know happens to own one of the
most profitable companies or jeff bezos
who owns one of the most profitable
companies on the other hand inequality
has never been more narrow many of us
own phones identical to elon musk elon
musk doesn't have a or jeff bezos
doesn't have a doesn't have better
access to the day-to-day technology than
anyone else does this did not used to be
the case of course you only have to go
back two or three decades and the top
mobile phones that were available were
well out of the reach of the average
person now the top mobile phone you know
the as i'm recording this it's like the
iphone 13 pro or whatever that is well
within the budget of many many people so
two for the top desktop computers and so
on and so forth and all of this is to
say that the typical person has access
to technology which directed towards
scientific discovery could indeed make
breakthroughs that people of the past
could only have dreamed of and to solve
problems even outstanding problems today
routinely amateur astronomers make
discoveries of things like comets and
even today exoplanets just by looking at
published data on the internet that's
freely available and processing it so
the evidence is absolutely available to
everyone in order to make these
discoveries to solve some of our most
pressing problems david goes on to say
quote
thus physical reality is self-similar on
several levels
among the stupendous complexities of the
universe and multiverse
some patterns are nevertheless endlessly
repeated earth and jupiter are in many
ways dramatically dissimilar planets but
they both move in ellipses and they are
both made of the same set of 100 or so
chemical elements albeit in different
proportions
and so are their parallel universe
counterparts the evidence that so
impressed galileo in his contemporaries
also exists on other planets and in
distant galaxies the evidence being
considered at this moment by physicists
and astronomers would also have been
available a billion years ago and will
still be available a billion years hence
the very existence of general
explanatory theories implies that
disparate objects and events are
physically alike in some ways the light
reaching us from distant galaxies is
after all only light but it looks to us
like galaxies thus reality contains not
only evidence but also the means such as
our minds and our artifacts of
understanding it there are mathematical
symbols in physical reality the fact
that it is we who put them there does
not make them any less physical in those
symbols in our planetariums books films
and computer memories and in our brains
there are images of physical reality at
large images not just of the appearance
of objects but of the structure of
reality there are laws and explanations
reductive and emergent there are
descriptions and explanations of the big
bang and of subnuclear particles and
processes there are mathematical
abstractions fiction art morality shadow
photons parallel universes to the extent
that these symbols images and theories
are true that is they resemble
inappropriate respects the concrete or
abstract things they refer to their
existence gives reality a new sort of
self-similarity the self-similarity we
call knowledge
and that there is the end of chapter
four of the fabric of reality criteria
for reality and i want to note here just
at the end there that powerful way of
ending echoes what is said
by david in one of his ted talks where
he talks about this kind of
self-similarity when he talks about the
quasar the most important kind of
self-similarity is the self-similarity
of what happens inside of our minds
where we try to understand
objects in our world including things
like quasars what happens over time the
special relationship we have with the
laws of physics means that there could
be an object like a quasar with physics
as violent and unusual as is going on
inequalizer and that physics we can come
to understand and so we can come to
build not merely as david says a visual
representation of what the quasar looks
like in our mind so we can see it in our
mind's eye but also we can have
mathematical relationships we can come
to understand the laws the physical laws
expressed in mathematical relationships
and expressed in natural language in our
minds as well and over time our
explanation our model of that quasar
comes to represent the real quasar
existing out there in physical reality
with greater and greater fidelity over
time the two structures the model that's
going on inside of our minds and the
physical thing out there billions of
light years away come to resemble one
another more and more accurately over
time this is self-similarity this is the
most important kind of self-similarity
that we know of because it implies
everything that we've been talking about
here it implies realism it implies that
this explanation this objective
explanation that is being built over
time error corrected over time in our
minds conjectured over time in our minds
and error corrected is coming to more
accurately represent the reality the
physical reality that's out there and
this final paragraph also it is a
defense of realism it's it's also i
would say an improvement on papa so
let's go to that now let's have a look
at what popper actually said in
objective knowledge about
common sense and realism just briefly
and i'm looking at page 37 if anyone
wants to read along this is page 37 of
objective knowledge he says realism is
essential to common sense common sense
or enlightened common sense
distinguishes between appearance and
reality this may be illustrated by
examples such as today the air is so
clear that the mountains appear so much
nearer than they really are or perhaps
he appears to do it without effort but
he has confessed to me that the tension
is almost unbearable but common sense
also realizes that appearances say a
reflection in a looking glass have a
sort of reality in other words that
there can be a surface reality that is
an appearance and a depth reality
moreover there are many sorts of real
things and then popper goes on to list a
whole bunch of
real things so i'll skip over that and
we'll go to papa's arguments for realism
that he comes to he says quote from papa
my thesis is that realism is neither
demonstrable nor refutable realism like
anything else outside logic and finite
arithmetic is not demonstrable but while
empirical scientific theories are
refutable realism is not even refutable
now i would say here and here is me
translating popper and i could be
getting this wrong when he uses the word
refutation here what he's talking about
is
experimental falsification of course we
can refute
realism or we can refute any other
philosophical theory that we like by
means of philosophical arguments now
we'll fail to do so in the case of
realism it doesn't mean we can't say hey
that's wrong because here's my argument
that the simulation hypothesis is
correct so i'm refuting realism i'm not
successful in my refutation but i'm
attempting to refute it or it could also
mean that papa is saying that there's
simply no way that any argument can
possibly refute realism or possibly show
that realism is wrong i don't think he
would go that far after all we're
fallible and so making a categorical
claim like it's impossible to
even show a flaw with realism can't
possibly be the case anyway he whatever
the case he goes on to say
that realism not being refutable shares
this irrefutability with many
philosophical or metaphysical theories
in particular also with idealism yes so
there we have it so he's essentially he
must be saying there that all of these
metaphysical theories idealism or
whatever else the simulation hypothesis
are not experimentally testable or
experimentally falsifiable and he's
identifying that with refutability it
could be the case that he's simply wrong
as well and as david has pointed out in
the fabric of reality well we can refute
idealism how well by talking about the
sheer amount of computation required in
order to generate an idealistic
conception of the world if you take
seriously what idealism is then you
would need to have some means of
computing where all of the objects in
your dream world happen to be and that
would amount to computing what's really
going on in the world and so therefore
we have realism so there's all sorts of
ways of
coming at this refutation of things that
aren't realism so that very well could
be a simple improvement on papa because
he goes on straight away to say but it
is arguable and the weight of the
arguments is overwhelmingly in its favor
okay so um
end quote so this is a poor phrasing i
would say if papa the weight of the
arguments okay so we don't endorse this
idea that we have weight of arguments
better to say so if he's just saying um
a good explanation is what david would
say presumably the way in which to
really come at this is to say that we
refute idealism because it's a bad
explanation rather than talking about
weight of arguments we can argue for
realism because it is the best
explanation of our metaphysical ontology
if we want to use the fancy words but
that's the fact of the matter our best
explanation the most parsimonious way of
viewing our experience of the world is
that it really exists there's an
external reality out there beyond our
dreaming beyond our being inside of a
simulation or anything else like that
papa goes on to say quote common sense
is on the side of realism there are of
course even before descartes a few hints
of doubt whether or not our ordinary
world is perhaps just a dream but even
descartes and locke were realists a
philosophical theory competing with
realism did not seriously start before
berkeley hume and can't kant
incidentally even provided a proof for
realism but it was not a valid proof and
i think it important that we should be
clear why no valid proof of realism can
exist end quote quite right okay we
can't and we don't need to the proof is
not the most important thing unless you
are someone who subscribes to the
hierarchy that david talks about in the
fabric of reality in the chapter i just
read where mathematical proof
mathematics the certainty one supposedly
gets with mathematics is the gold
standard against which all other claims
to truth uh must be measured and the
only thing that sort of gets anywhere
near that is scientific confidence that
we have these arguments where we collect
the evidence and we become highly
confident in our scientific claims
whereas philosophy is a matter of taste
so we don't need to worry about the fact
there's no valid proof for realism
there's no scientific evidence for
realism we have a robust explanation of
realism a philosophically rigorous
argument that explains why realism is
correct so what does poppa say about
idealism well he says quote in its
simplest form idealism says the world
which includes my present audience is
just a dream now it is clear that this
theory though you will know it is false
is not refutable whatever you my
audience may do to convince me of your
reality talking to me or writing a
letter or perhaps kicking me it cannot
possibly assume the force of a
refutation for i would continue to say
that i am dreaming that you are talking
to me or that i received a letter or
filter kick one might say that these
answers are all in various ways
immunizing stratagems that is so and it
is a strong argument against idealism
but again that it is a self-immunising
theory does not refute it so we can see
there that clearly what he means by
refutation is experimental falsification
rather than refutation by it being a bad
explanation or rejecting it because it's
a bad explanation and he continues quote
thus idealism is irrefutable and this
means of course that realism is in
demonstrable i am prepared to concede
that realism is not only in demonstrable
but like idealism irrefutable also that
no describable event and no conceivable
experience can be taken as an effective
refutation of realism thus there will be
in this issue as in so many no
conclusive argument but there are
arguments in favor of realism or rather
against idealism and now popper goes on
to list his arguments against idealism
or full realism if you like one perhaps
the strongest argument consists of a
combination of two a that realism is
part of common sense and b that all the
alleged arguments against it are not
only philosophical in the most
derogatory sense of this term but are at
the same time based upon an uncritically
accepted part of common sense that is to
say upon that mistaken part of the
common sense theory of knowledge which i
have called the bucket theory of mind
and two although science is a bit out of
fashion today with some people for
reasons which are regrettably far from
negligible we should not ignore its
relevance to realism despite the fact
that there are scientists who are not
realists such as ernst mark or in our
own lifetime eugene wigner their
arguments fall very clearly in the class
just characterized in 1b let us here
forget about wigner's argument from
atomic physics we can then assert that
almost all if not all physical chemical
or biological theories imply realism in
the sense that if they are true realism
must also be true this is one of the
reasons why some people speak of
scientific realism it is quite a good
reason because of its apparent lack of
testability i myself happen to prefer to
call realism metaphysical rather than
scientific however one may look at this
there are excellent reasons for saying
that what we attempt in science is to
describe and so far as possible explain
reality we do so with the help of
conjectural theories that is theories
which we hope are true or near the truth
but which we cannot establish as certain
or even as probable in the sense of a
probability calculus even though they
are the best theories which we are able
to produce and may therefore be called
probable as long as this term is kept
free from any association with the
calculus of probability there is a
closely related and excellent sense in
which we can speak of scientific realism
the procedure we adopt may lead as long
as it does not break down for example
because of antirational attitudes to
success in the sense that how
conjectural theories tend progressively
to come nearer to the truth that is to
true descriptions of certain facts or
aspects of reality and then papa goes on
to make some more remarks about realism
but i'm going to pick it up i'm going to
skip that and pick it up where he says
quote to me idealism appears absurd for
it also implies something like this that
it is my mind which creates this
beautiful world but i know i am not its
creator after all the famous remark
beauty is in the eye of the beholder
though perhaps not an utterly stupid
remark means no more than that there is
a problem of the appreciation of beauty
i know that the beauty of rembrandt's
self-portrait is not in my eye nor that
of bach's passion in my ear on the
contrary i can establish to my
satisfaction by opening and closing my
eyes and ears that my eyes and ears are
not good enough to take in all the
beauty that is there moreover there are
people who are better judges better able
than i to appreciate the beauty of
pictures and music denying realism
amounts to megalomania the most
widespread occupational disease of the
professional philosopher
that's great end quote so there um
popper is actually getting out he's he's
hinting at what david says uh using
different language of course that
the inner workings of the mind of the
supposed idealists would have to be as
complex as what realism actually is okay
it would contain all of this complexity
and he goes on to say quote out of many
other weighty though inconclusive
arguments i wish to mention only one it
is this if realism is true more
especially something approaching
scientific realism then the reason for
the impossibility of proving it is
obvious the reason is that our
subjective knowledge even perceptual
knowledge consists of dispositions to
act and is thus a kind of tentative
adaptation to reality and that we are
its searches at best and at any rate
fallible there is no guarantee against
error at the same time the whole
question of the truth and falsity of our
opinions and theories clearly becomes
pointless if there is no reality only
dreams or illusions to sum up i propose
to accept realism as the only sensible
hypothesis and as a conjecture to which
no sensible alternative has ever been
offered i do not wish to be dogmatic
about this issue any more than about any
other but i think i know all the
epistemological arguments they are
mainly subjectivists which have been
offered in favor of alternatives to
realism such as positivism idealism
phenomenalism phenomenology and so on
and although i am not an enemy of the
discussion of isms in philosophy i
regard all the philosophical arguments
which to my knowledge have ever been
offered in favor of my list of isms are
clearly mistaken most of them are the
result of a mistaken quest for certainty
or for secure foundations on which to
build and all of them are typical
philosophers mistakes in the worst sense
of the term they are all derivatives of
the mistaken the commonsensical theory
of knowledge which does not stand up to
any serious criticism pausing there my
reflection that's wonderful there okay
that is a wonderful philosophical
refutation of all of those isms he talks
about in a defense of realism
all of these alternatives idealism chief
among them and its cousins what popper
is saying there is that the only reason
the only motivation that anyone has for
putting them forward in the first place
is because they want to secure
foundation they're relying on the
justified true belief conception of
knowledge i don't believe in conjectural
knowledge in the first place they want
to know okay in the case of modern
variants like the simulation hypothesis
why postulate it well so that you can
have some way of saying well this is
absolutely certainly the case this is
certainly what our ultimate reality
consists of it's simulations inside of
simulation inside of simulations now i'm
justified in my belief that realism
naive realism is not the case is not
true but if you're a populion if you're
a fallibilist then you just say well
there's no way of being certain about
any of this but it's a good working
hypothesis just to say that we know that
realism is the case and we can come to
know that external physical reality that
really exists better and better over
time never with certainty but it's a
good way it's a good place to start on
the assumption that realism is true so
we'll end it there for today and just to
know that just to notice that people
have asked me i think in my uh ask me
anything episodes where david has
improved upon popper and i gave a few
indications of where i thought david had
improved on popular here's another one
okay in this defense of realism this
defense of realism i think the most
parsimonious way of defending realism is
to say it's the best explanation all
these other ways of trying to come at
the ultimate metaphysical ontology what
really truly is the case when it comes
to the experience we find ourselves in
the reason why idealism fails to be the
best explanation is because it
ultimately is realism with the
additional philosophical assumption that
we're just dreaming realism into
existence and i think david has the best
way of explaining what it means for
something to exist or what it means for
something to be real in the beginning of
infinity where he says a thing is real
or a thing exists insofar as it appears
in our best explanations of reality and
not otherwise that's how we know that's
how we can conclude a thing exists so
that's the end of the episode today if
you'd like to become a patreon supporter
please feel free you can search for that
on google okay just search for patreon
podcast or patreon brett hall but until
next time bye
do
[Music]
um
oh
[Music]
up